[WIP] Federation: Stub PR to update `service:check` (#503)
apollographql/apollo: docs/source/platform/schema-validation.mdx

Apollo provides a tool to protect for exactly this scenario called **schema validation**.

// TODO modify this top-level description for how schema validation for federation is done at the **service** level

> **Note:** Schema validation is an Apollo Platform feature available on the [Team and Enterprise plans](https://www.apollographql.com/plans/) of [Apollo Engine](https://engine.apollographql.com).

## How it works

Schema validation is run through the Apollo CLI by executing the `apollo service:check` command. Apollo will generate a diff between your local schema and your most recently registered schema, then validate that the changes are safe by checking if any queries actively running against your graph will be affected.
If your graph is composed using federation, you can also use the `apollo service:check` command to validate individual service changes by providing a service name. However, unlike running service check on a non-federated service, Engine first needs to run composition on the proposed partial schema with the current list of implementing services and their partial schemas. Composition must pass before validation can continue.

Here's how it works:

> // [TODO: Hopefully make this a toggle, where you can see the federation and the non-federation version of how it works].

Author: Let's forgo the toggle idea for now since adding in interactivity should align with our design paradigms that we're still trying to nail down.

Reviewer: okie dokie :)

1. You run `apollo service:check` locally or in CI. The proposed schema is sent to Engine's schema registry.
1. Engine creates a diff between the local schema and the most recently published schema in the registry.
1. Engine fetches a list of all operations sent to your graph in the last day (time window is [configurable](#adjusting-validation-parameters)).
1. Engine walks through the schema diff change-by-change and compares against the operation list to see if the changes will affect the behavior of any operations.
1. Engine returns the schema diff and indicates any breaking changes found.
1. The CLI prints the output of this check with a link to view more details in the Engine UI.

Here's how it works for federation:

> 1. You _also_ run `apollo service:check` but instead you provide a service name like so: `apollo service:check --federated --serviceName=example --endpoint=http://localhost:4000/graphql`

Author: You don't need to have `--federated` anymore. I also think that we should just have an additional **extra** step in the above flow rather than repeating all the same flow here.

Reviewer: oh man that's a v good idea :)

 The proposed partial schema for that provided service is then sent to Engine's schema registry where it will attempt to compose the partial schema with the current schema.
1. If composition fails then we do not continue with validation and terminate early.
1. If composition succeeds Engine then creates a diff between the local partial schema and the most recently published schema in the registry.
1. Engine walks through the partial schema diff change-by-change and compares against the operation list see if the changes will affect the behavior of any operations.
1. Engine returns the schema diff and indicates any breaking changes found.
1. The CLI prints the output of this check with a link to view more details in the Engine UI. 

### Breaking change detection

// [TODO: Add a federation-specific paragraph about composition errors]

Since federation involves merging the partial schema you're running service check against with the current schema, it's possible to run into compposition errors. For example, if you try to run validation on a partial schema with conflicting type names as the current schema then this will definitely result in a composition error. 

> At the moment composition warnings are also grouped together with composition errors. Composition warnings might involve referencing another service's deprecated field.

Author: there are no more composition warnings.

Reviewer: deleto

description: Check if schema changes are safe or breaking by comparing against live server traffic
---

[//]: # (Description: Changes to this page that explain, in parallel with the monolithic version, how schema validation works with federation, highlighting that there's an extra step in the `apollo service:check` command which will build the composed schema to run traffic validation against. Ideally, this change could be done as a toggle either for each section or for the entire page where the extra details and steps are added for federation. If the toggle is difficult, then we should simply have a pattern that we use, like using a different color or an italicized font for the parts of the process that are federation-specific)
[//]: # (Assignee: Caydie)
[//]: # (Reviewer: Jake)

> There are many types of schema changes that can be potentially breaking to clients, like removing a field, if made without special consideration. For safety, some organizations take the approach of _never_ making these types of changes, but this leads to an ever-growing schema and reduced API flexibility over time. In the case of federated services where multiple organizations or teams are working on different parts of the same graph, these kinds of breaking changes are especially critical to monitor. In reality, making these types of changes to a schema can be very safe as long as you have tools in place to ensure that no queries are broken in the process.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
There are many types of schema changes that can be potentially breaking to clients. For safety, some organizations take the approach of _never_ making these types of changes, but this leads to an ever-growing schema and reduced API flexibility over time. In the case of federated services where multiple organizations or teams are working on different parts of the same graph, these kinds of breaking changes are especially critical. Making these types of changes can be safe as long as you have tools in place.
```

This is removing a lot of the words to hopefully say the same thing

Reviewer: less is more :) i like it

## How it works

Schema validation is run through the Apollo CLI by executing the `apollo service:check` command. Apollo will generate a diff between your local schema and your most recently registered schema, then validate that the changes are safe by checking if any queries actively running against your graph will be affected.

> With a federated graph, you will use the `apollo service:check` command to validate individual service changes by adding the `--serviceName` flag. Engine will run composition on the proposed partial schema with the current list of implementing services and their partial schemas, making sure that the composition is successful. That composed schema will then be diff'ed against the most recently registered schema and validate that those changes are safe.

Author: Should we have this as a separate paragraph? Or if it already is, maybe we should add a newline here for style nit.

> With a federated graph, you will use the `apollo service:check` command to validate individual service changes by adding the `--serviceName` flag. Engine will run composition on the proposed partial schema with the current list of implementing services and their partial schemas, making sure that the composition is successful. That composed schema will then be diff'ed against the most recently registered schema and validate that those changes are safe.

Author: It seems like the rest of this document is written in third person. Could we change this to be the same?

> What exactly is composition? Composition is just Engine's algorithm to combine each implementing service's partial schema into one data graph.

Author: I'm not sure that we need this paragraph here? Maybe we can link out from the `composition` keyword to the docs or the open source implementation? Also it's not Engine's algorithm because it's open source.

Reviewer: i'll remove!

## How it works

Schema validation is run through the Apollo CLI by executing the `apollo service:check` command. Apollo will generate a diff between your local schema and your most recently registered schema, then validate that the changes are safe by checking if any queries actively running against your graph will be affected.

> If your graph is composed using federation, you can also use the `apollo service:check` command to validate individual service changes by providing a service name. However, unlike running service check on a non-federated service, Engine first needs to run composition on the proposed partial schema with the current list of implementing services and their partial schemas. Composition must pass before validation can continue.

Reviewer 3: > If your graph is composed using federation, you can also use the `apollo service:check` command to validate individual service changes by providing a service name.

I'd add that the service name is a flag, and but it in backticks. Like...

> If your graph is composed using federation, you can also use the `apollo service:check` command to validate individual service changes by adding the `--serviceName` flag.

Reviewer: great idea! :) added ~

> If your graph is composed using federation, you can also use the `apollo service:check` command to validate individual service changes by adding the `--serviceName` flag. However, unlike running service check on a non-federated service, Engine first needs to run composition on the proposed partial schema with the current list of implementing services and their partial schemas. Composition must pass before validation can continue.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
With a federated graph, you will use the `apollo service:check` command to validate individual service changes by adding the `--serviceName` flag. Engine will run composition on the proposed partial schema with the current list of implementing services and their partial schemas, making sure that the composition is successful. That composed schema will then be diff'ed against the most recently registered schema and validate that those changes are safe.
```

> But wait... What exactly is composition? 🤔 In order to have different implementing services contribute to the same graph, there needs to be a way to combine each implementing service's partial schemas into one large data graph. Engine's composition algorithm does exactly this.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
What exactly is composition? There needs to be a way to combine each implementing service's partial schema into one data graph; that's what Engine's composition algorithm does.
```

Here's how schema validation works for federated and non-federated services:

> 1. You run `apollo service:check` locally or in CI. For federated services run the same command but add `--serviceName=ExampleService --endpoint=http://loocalhost:4000/graphql` to the end. The proposed schema/partial schema (if using federation) is sent to Engine's schema registry.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
1. Run `apollo service:check` locally or in CI. For federated services, add `--serviceName=ExampleService --endpoint=http://loocalhost:4000/graphql`. The proposed schema, or partial schema if using federation, is then sent to Engine's schema registry.
```

> 1. If you're using federation, Engine's schema registry will attempt to compose the partial schema with the current schema. If composition fails then we do not continue with validation and exit early.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
1. If using federation, Engine's schema registry will attempt to compose the partial schema with the current schema. If composition fails, then we do not continue with validation.
```

> 1. Engine creates a diff between the local schema and the most recently published schema in the registry. For federation this step happens after composition passes.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
1. Engine creates a diff between the local schema and the most recently published schema in the registry.
```

Do we need the last sentence?

Reviewer: meh no we don't need it. i think it's clear enough from the step above

1. Engine fetches a list of all operations sent to your graph in the last day (time window is [configurable](#adjusting-validation-parameters)).
1. Engine walks through the schema diff change-by-change and compares against the operation list to see if the changes will affect the behavior of any operations.
1. Engine returns the schema diff and indicates any breaking changes found.
1. The CLI prints the output of this check with a link to view more details in the Engine UI.

### Breaking change detection

> Since federation involves merging the partial schema you're running service check against with the current schema, it's possible to run into compposition errors. For example, if you try to run validation on a partial schema with conflicting type names as the current schema then this will definitely result in a composition error. 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The first breaking change Engine can capture is a federated service being unable to compose with the rest of a federated graph. Types of composition failures are documented [here]().
```

I feel like there's a lot of "because of this" that we don't need. I think this calls for more of the _what_ than the _why_.

- [ ] This needs the link to the composition failure docs

Reviewer: where are the composition failures doc?
